ESUR Guidelines
on Contrast Agents

European Society of Urogenital Radiology

10.0



=

ESUR Guidelines
on Contrast Agents

European Society of Urogenital Radiology

10.0


2

PREFACE

The Contrast Media Safety Committee is proud to present the 10”
version of its Contrast Agent Guidelines. We started in 1994 and we
have on average updated the booklet every 2 to 3 years. Over the
years, more than 200,000 copies of the booklet have been printed
and it has been translated into many languages. Although the contrast
agents in current use have been on the market for many years, minor
changes occur in their adverse reaction pattern and new observations
are reported.

The 10" version of the Guidelines includes updated sections on acute
adverse reactions, gadolinium contrast agents and other gadolinium
issues, post contrast acute kidney injury (PC-AKI) and myeloma and
contrast media. The CMSC has decided to regularize its use of the
terms ,contrast agent’ and ,contrast medium’ and there is a brief
section on terminology a the start of the Guidelines.

We hope that you like the new version, that it is helpful in your practice
and that it will benefit all our patients. Comments and questions are
welcome at esursecretary@esur.org

Contrast Media Safety Committee
March 2018
Henrik S. Thomsen, Chairman

NOTE: CMSC guidelines are based on evidence in the literature
whenever possible. Where there is insufficient published evidence,
guidelines are based on clinical consensus within the Committee.
Some CMSC guidelines may differ from the Summary of Product

Characteristics (SPC, label), and/or guidelines drawn up by national
and other radiological bodies.

LEGAL NOTICE: The Committee and authors of the 10.0 contrast media
guidelines claim no responsibility for the content of the translated
versions of the guidelines.

2 PREFACE


=

QUICK GUIDE TO THE CMSC CONTRAST AGENT
GUIDELINES, VERSION 10

Terminology: Contrast agents and contrast media

SECTION A: GENERAL ADVERSE REACTIONS

Includes material on:

e Acute adverse reactions to iodine- and gadolinium-based
contrast agents.

e Management of acute adverse reactions to iodine- and
gadolinium-based and ultrasound contrast agents.

e Late adverse reactions.

e Thyrotoxicosis.

e Nephrogenic systemic fibrosis (NSF).

SECTION B: RENAL ADVERSE REACTIONS
(POST CONTRAST ACUTE KIDNEY INJURY, PC-AKI)

Includes material on:

e Measurement of renal function.

e Renal adverse reactions to iodine- and gadolinium-based
contrast agents.

e Metformin.

SECTION C: MISCELLANEOUS

All other topics for which the Committee has prepared
guidelines, including:

e Pediatric use of contrast agents.

e Contrast medium extravasation.

e Pregnancy and lactation.

e Ultrasound contrast agents.

e Barium contrast media.

e Off-label use of contrast agents.

PREFACE 3


2

CONTENTS
TERMINOLOGY: CONTRAST AGENTS AND CONTRAST MEDIA

A. GENERAL ADVERSE REACTIONS 6
A.1.. ACUTE ADVERSE REACTIONS 6
A.1.1. Acute adverse reactions to iodine- and gadolinium-based
contrast agents 7
A.1.2. Management of acute adverse reactions 8
A.1.3. Warming iodine-based contrast medium before administration 11
A.1.4. Extravascular administration of an iodine-based
contrast medium 1
A.1.5. Fasting before administration of contrast agents 1
A.2. LATE ADVERSE REACTIONS 12
A.3. VERY LATE ADVERSE REACTIONS 13
A.3.1. Very late adverse reactions to iodine-based contrast media:
thyrotoxicosis 3
A.3.2. Very late adverse reactions to gadolinium-based contrast agents:
nephrogenic systemic fibrosis (NSF) 4
B. RENAL ADVERSE REACTIONS
(POST-CONTRAST ACUTE KIDNEY INJURY, PC-AKI) 17
B.1. MEASUREMENT OF RENAL FUNCTION 17
B.2. RENAL ADVERSE REACTIONS TO IODINE-BASED
CONTRAST MEDIA 18
B.2.1. Time of Referral 18
B.2.2. Before the Examination 19
B.2.3. Time of examination 20
B.2.4. After the Examination 20
B.2.5. Multiple myeloma patients 21
B.3. RENAL ADVERSE REACTIONS TO GADOLINIUM-BASED
CONTRAST MEDIA 21
B.4. PATIENTS WITH DIABETES MELLITUS TAKING METFORMIN 22
B.4.1. lodine-based contrast media 22
B.4.2. Gadolinium-based contrast media 22

B.5. DIALYSIS AND CONTRAST MEDIUM ADMINISTRATION 23
B.6. CAN lODINE- AND GADOLINIUM-BASED CONTRAST

AGENTS SAFELY BE GIVEN ON THE SAME DAY

FOR ROUTINE EXAMINATIONS? 24
B.7, HOW LONG SHOULD THERE BE BETWEEN

TWO IODINE-BASED CONTRAST MEDIUM INJECTIONS

FOR ROUTINE EXAMINATIONS? 25
B.8. HOW LONG SHOULD THERE BE BETWEEN TWO

GADOLINIUM-BASED CONTRAST AGENT INJECTIONS

FOR ROUTINE EXAMINATIONS? 25

4 CONTENTS



=

C. MISCELLANEOUS 26
C.1.. CONTRAST MEDIUM EXTRAVASATION 26
C.2. PULMONARY EFFECTS OF IODINE-BASED

CONTRAST MEDIA 27
C.3. EFFECTS OF CONTRAST MEDIA ON BLOOD
AND ENDOTHELIUM 27
C.3.1. Thrombosis 27
C.3.2. Sickle Cell Disease 28
C.4. CONTRAST AGENTS AND CATECHOLAMINE PRODUCING
TUMORS (PHEOCHROMOCYTOMA AND PARAGANGLIOMA) 28
C.5. PREGNANCY AND LACTATION 29
C.6. INTERACTION WITH OTHER DRUGS AND CLINICALTESTS 30
C.7, GADOLINIUM ISSUES 31
C.7.1. Gadolinium retention in the brain 31
C.72. Gadolinium retention in bone, liver and skin 32
C.73. Gadolinium contamination of the environment 32
C.8. SAFETY OF ULTRASOUND CONTRAST AGENTS 33
C.9. SAFETY OF BARIUM CONTRAST MEDIA 34
C.10.PEDIATRIC USE OF CONTRAST AGENTS 35
C.11. OFFLABEL USE OF CONTRAST AGENTS 35

D. QUESTIONNAIRES/LETTERS 36

D.1. AN EXAMPLE OF A SUITABLE LETTER FOR THE
PATIENT TO TAKE TO THE ALLGERGY CONSULTATION 36
D.2. QUESTIONNAIRE FOR IODINE-BASED CONTRAST

MEDIA ADMINISTRATION TO BE COMPLETED

BY THE REFERRING CLINICIAN 38
D.3. QUESTIONNAIRE FOR GADOLINIUM-BASED CONTRAST

AGENT ADMINISTRATION TO BE COMPLETED

BY THE REFERRING CLINICIAN 39

E. APPENDIX 40
Appendix 1. Publications from the ESUR Contrast

Media Safety Committee 40

Appendix 2. Contrast Media Safety Committee - Spring 2018 43

Terminology: Contrast agents and contrast media

A contrast agent is a substance which alters the contrast in images
produced by any method. It is a general term which can be used for
X-ray, MR and ultrasound contrast compounds.

A contrast medium is a substance which alters the contrast in X-ray
images by altering transmission of the X-ray beam. This term should be
reserved for X-ray contrast compounds, e.g. iodine-based, barium, air

and carbon dioxide.
CONTENTS 5


2

A. GENERAL ADVERSE REACTIONS

A.1. |. ACUTE ADVERSE REACTIONS

Definition: An adverse reaction which occurs within 1 hour of
contrast agent injection.

The same acute adverse reactions are seen after iodine- and
gadolinium-based contrast agents and after ultrasound contrast
agents. The incidence is highest after iodine-based contrast
media and lowest after ultrasound agents.

Classification

Acute reactions are either allergy-like, hypersensitivity reactions or
chemotoxic responses. Allergy-like reactions may or may not be true IgE
mediated allergy.

Mild Mild urticaria Grade 1 Nausea/mild
Mild itching Grade 1 vomiting
Erythema Grade 1 Warmth/chills
Anxiety

Vasovagal reaction
which resolves
spontaneously

Severe Hypotensive shock Grade 3 Arrythmia
Respiratory arrest Grade 4 Convulsion
Cardiac arrest Grade 4

Note:

¢ Be aware that what at first appears to be a mild reaction may develop
into a more serious reaction.

e Not all symptoms experienced by patients in the hour after contrast
agent injections are adverse reactions to the contrast agent.

e Patient anxiety may cause symptoms after contrast agent administation
(Lalli effect).

e When anew contrast agent is first introduced to a department, adverse
effects tend to be overreported (Weber effect).

6 A. GENERAL ADVERSE REACTIONS


=

A.1.1. Acute adverse reactions to iodine- and gadolinium-
based contrast agents

Note: Retrospective studies of the incidence of acute adverse reactions
suffer from considerable underreporting and are therefore unreliable.

Risk factors for acute reactions
Patient related Patients with a history of:

e Previous moderate or severe acute reaction (see
classification above) to an iodine- or gadolinium-
based contrast agent.

e Asthma requiring medical treatment.

e Atopy requiring medical treatment.

Contrast medium a) lodine-based:
related e High-osmolality ionic contrast media.

e There is no difference in the incidence of acute
reactions between the non-ionic low-osmolar
contrast agents and the non-ionic iso-osmolar
contrast agents.

e There is no difference in the incidence of acute
adverse events among the non-ionic low-
osmolar agents.

b) Gadolinium-based:

e The risk of a reaction is not related to the
osmolality of the contrast agent: the low doses
used make the osmolar load very small.

e There is no difference in the incidence of acute
adverse reactions among the gadolinium-based
extracellular agents.

To reduce the risk of an acute reaction

to iodine- and gadolinium-based agents

For all patients = ° Use a non-ionic iodine-based contrast medium.

For patients at ¢ Consider an alternative test not requiring a

increased risk of contrast agent of similar class.

reaction (see risk ¢ For previous contrast agent reactors: use

factors above) a different contrast agent, preferably after
consultation with a specialist in drug allergy.

e Premedication is not recommended because
there is not good evidence of its effectiveness

Be prepared for an acute reaction
For all patients e Have the drugs and equipment for resuscitation
readily available (see A.1.2.1.).

e Keep the patient in a medical environment for 30
minutes after contrast agent injection.

A. GENERAL ADVERSE REACTIONS 7


2

A.1.2. Management of acute adverse reactions

The management is the same for acute adverse reactions after iodine-
and gadolinium-based and ultrasound contrast agents.

A.1.2.1. Be prepared to treat acute adverse reactions

First line emergency drugs and equipment which should be
in the examination room:

Adrenaline 1:1,000

Atropine

|.V. fluids - normal saline or Ringer's solution

Sphygmomanometer

e Resuscitation trolley should be available in the department.

e Emergency numbers for the hospital resuscitation team
should be in the examination room.

e Medical and technical staff should receive regular education
in the management of acute adverse reactions and
in resuscitation technique.

e Equipment for collecting blood for tryptase and histamine
measurement should be readily available.

e Keep the patient in a medical environment for 30 minutes
after contrast agent injection.

A.1.2.2.Simple guidelines for first line treatment of acute reactions
to all contrast agents

When an acute reaction occurs, check for the following:

e Skin erythema, urticaria (undress the patient to inspect
the whole body).

e Nausea, vomiting.

e Decreased blood pressure, abnormal heart rate.

e Dyspnea, bronchospasm (requires auscultation for reliable
diagnosis).

8 A. GENERAL ADVERSE REACTIONS


Nausea/vomiting

Transient: supportive treatment.

Severe, protracted: appropriate antiemetic drugs should be
considered.

Note: severe vomiting may occur during anaphylaxis.

Urticaria

Scattered, transient: supportive treatment including observation.
Scattered, protracted or generalized or angioedema:
appropriate H1-antihistamine should be given intramuscularly or
intravenously. Drowsiness and/or hypotension may occur.

After administration of anithistamines, the patient may

no longer be insured to drive a car or operate machinery.

Bronchospasm

1. Oxygen by mask (6-10 I/min).

2.B-2-agonist metered dose inhaler (2-3 deep inhalations).

3.Adrenaline

Normal blood pressure

Intramuscular: 1:1,000, 0.1-0.3 ml (0.1-0.3 mg) [use smaller

dose in patients with coronary artery disease or elderly patients].

In pediatric patients: 50 % of adult dose to pediatric patients

between 6 and 12 years old and 25 % of adult dose to pediatric

patients below 6 years old - repeat as needed.

Decreased blood pressure

Intramuscular: 1:1,000, 0.5 ml (0.5 mg).

In pediatric patients: 6-12 years: 0.3 ml (0.3 mg) intramuscularly
< 6 years: 0.15 ml (0.15 mg) intramuscularly

Laryngeal edema
1. Oxygen by mask (6-10 I/min).
2.Intramuscular adrenaline (1:1,000), 0.5 ml (0.5 mg) for adults
- repeat as needed.
In pediatric patients: 6-12 years: 0.3 ml (0.3 mg) intramuscularly
<6 years: 0.15 ml (0.15 mg) intramuscularly

Hypotension

Isolated hypotension

1. Elevate patient's legs.

2.Oxygen by mask (6-10 |/min).

3.Intravenous fluid: rapidly, normal saline or Ringer’s solution up
to 2 litres.

4.|f unresponsive: adrenaline: 1:1,000, 0.5 ml (0.5 mg)
intramuscularly - repeat as needed.
In pediatric patients: 6-12 years: 0.3 ml (0.3 mg) intramuscularly

<6 years: 0.15 ml (0.15 mg) intramuscularly

A. GENERAL ADVERSE REACTIONS oo


Vasovagal reaction (hypotension and bradycardia)

1. Elevate patient's legs.

2.Oxygen by mask (6-10 |/min).

3.Atropine 0.6-1.0 mg intravenously - repeat if necessary after
3-5 min, to 3 mg total (0.04 mg/kg) in adults. In pediatric
patients give 0.02 mg/kg intravenously (max 0.6 mg per dose)
- repeat if necessary to 2 mg total.

4.Intravenous fluids: rapidly, normal saline or Ringer's solution,
up to 2 litres.

5.|f the patient does not respond to these measures, treat as
for anaphylaxis.

Generalized anaphylactoid reaction

1. Call for resuscitation team.

2.Suction airway as needed.

3.Elevate patient's legs if hypotensive.

4.Oxygen by mask (6-10 I/min).

5.Intramuscular adrenaline (1:1,000), 0.5 ml (0.5 mg) in adults -
repeat as needed.
In pediatric patients: 6-12 years: 0.3 ml (0.3 mg) intramuscularly

<6 years: 0.15 ml (0.15 mg) intramuscularly

6.Intravenous fluids (e.g. normal saline, Ringer's solution) up to
2 liltres.

7. H1-blocker e.g. diphenhydramine 25-50 mg intravenous.

A.1.2.3. After a moderate or severe acute adverse reaction
to a contrast agent

Test for evidence of allergy

e Take blood samples for estimation of histamine and tryptase
at 1 and 2 hours after contrast agent administration and at 24
hours if the patient is still in the hospital.

e 1 to 6 months after the reaction the patient should be
referred to a specialist in drug allergy to have skin testing.
Prick and intradermal tests should be used to check for
evidence of true allergy to the contrast agent and for
evidence of cross-reactivity to other contrast agents.

e An example of a suitable letter for the patient to take to
the allergy consultation can be found in section D of these
guidelines.

10, A. GENERAL ADVERSE REACTIONS


Record the reaction

e Record the contrast agent name and dose and the details of
the reaction and its treatment in the patient's records.

e Record the information about the reaction (see above) in the
hospital adverse events register.

e If the reaction is severe or unusual, report it to the national
pharmacovigilance authority.

A.1.2.4.Review of treatment protocols

Radiologists and their staff should review treatment protocols
regularly (e.g. at 12 monthly intervals), so that each can
accomplish their role efficiently. Knowledge, training, and
preparation are crucial for guaranteeing appropriate and
effective treatment if there is an adverse contrast related event.

A.1.3. Warming iodine-based contrast medium before
administration

e Appears to make the patient more comfortable, based on
clinical observation.

e Reduces viscosity and may reduce the risk of contrast
medium extravasation.

e May reduce the rate of general adverse events, but data on
this is limited.

e Is widely regarded as best practice.

A.1.4. Extravascular administration of an iodine-based
contrast medium

e When absorption or leakage into the circulation is possible,
take the same precautions as for intravascular administration.

A.1.5. Fasting before administration of contrast agents

Fasting before intravenous administration of contrast agents
dates from the time when high-osmolar iodine-based contrast
media were used and many patients vomited. Fasting is not
recommended before administration of low- or iso-osmolar
non-ionic iodine-based contrast media or of gadolinium-based
agents.

A. GENERAL ADVERSE REACTIONS ne


2

A.2. LATE ADVERSE REACTIONS

Definition A late adverse reaction to intravascular iodine-
based contrast medium is defined as a reaction
which occurs 1 h to 1 week after contrast
medium injection.

Reactions Skin reactions similar in type to other drug
induced eruptions occur. Maculopapular
rashes, erythema, swelling and pruritus are
most common. Most skin reactions are mild to
moderate and self-limiting.

A variety of late symptoms (e.g., nausea,

vomiting, headache, musculoskeletal pains, fever)

have been described following contrast medium,

but many are not related to the contrast medium.
Risk factors for e Previous late contrast medium reaction

skin reactions e Interleukin-2 treatment
e Use of non-ionic dimers
Management Symptomatic and similar to the management

of other drug-induced skin reactions e.g.
antihistamines, topical steroids and emollients.

Recommendations Patients who have had a previous contrast
medium reaction, or who are on interleukin-2
treatment should be advised that a late skin
reaction is possible and that they should contact
a doctor if they have a problem.

Patch and delayed reading intradermal tests
may be useful to confirm a late skin reaction to
contrast medium and to study cross-reactivity
patterns with other agents.

To reduce the risk of repeat reaction, use

a contrast medium other than that which
precipitated the first reaction. Avoid agents which
have shown cross-reactivity on skin testing.

Drug prophylaxis is generally not recommended.

Note: Late skin reactions of the type which occur after
iodine-based contrast media have not been described after
gadolinium-based and ultrasound contrast media.

120 A. GENERAL ADVERSE REACTIONS


A.3. VERY LATE ADVERSE REACTIONS

Definition: an adverse reaction which usually occurs more than
1 week after contrast agent injection.

Type of reaction
lodine-based contrast media e Thyrotoxicosis
Gadolinium-based contrast agents ¢ Nephrogenic systemic fibrosis

A.3.1. Very late adverse reactions to iodine-based contrast
media: thyrotoxicosis

At risk Patients with untreated Graves’ disease.

Patients with multinodular goiter and thyroid
autonomy, especially if they are elderly and/or live
in an area of dietary iodine deficiency.
Not at risk Patients with normal thyroid function.
Recommendations lodine-based contrast media should

not be given to patients with manifest

hyperthyroidism.

e In patients suspected of being at risk of
thyrotoxicosis, TSH measurement may be
helpful.

e In selected high-risk patients, prophylactic
treatment may be given by an endocrinologist.

e Patients at risk should be closely monitored by
endocrinologists after iodine-based contrast
medium injection.

e Intravenous cholangiographic contrast media
should not be given to patients at risk.

A. GENERAL ADVERSE REACTIONS 13


2

A.3.2. Very late adverse reactions to gadolinium-based
contrast agents: nephrogenic systemic fibrosis (NSF)

Diagnosis A diagnosis of nephrogenic systemic fibrosis
(NSF) should only be made if the Yale NSF
Registry clinical and histopathological criteria
are met (J Am Acad Dermatol 2011; 65: 1095-
1106). The association between nephrogenic
systemic fibrosis (NSF) and gadolinium-based
contrast agents was recognized in 2006.

Clinical features Onset can be from the day of exposure for up
to 2-3 months. Rarely, it can occur years after
exposure.
Early changes are pain, pruritus, and swelling
and erythema of the skin, which usually start
in the legs.
Later changes include fibrotic thickening of
the skin and subcutaneous tissues and limb
contractures may occur. Fibrosis of internal
organs, é.g. muscle, diaphragm, heart, liver,
lungs may also occur.

There may be death if involvement of internal
organs is severe.

RISK FACTORS
Patient related e Reduced renal function, particularly if eGFR
< 15 ml/min/1.73 m2.
e Patients on dialysis.
Contrast agent © Gadodiamide was responsible for most
related reported NSF cases.
e NSF also occurred after gadopentetate
dimeglumine and gadoversetamide.
e Risk increases with increasing contrast
agent dose, but NSF may occur after a
single dose.
Estimated incidence ¢ 3-18 % after gadodiamide.
in patients with e 0.1-1 % after gadopentetate dimeglumine.

severe renal failure

14, A. GENERAL ADVERSE REACTIONS


=

GADOLINIUM-BASED CONTRAST AGENTS:

Risk classification (based on laboratory data) and
recommendations

Highest risk of NSF

Contrast agents Gadodiamide (Omniscan®)

Ligand: Non-ionic linear chelate (DTPA-BMA)
Gadopentetate dimeglumine (Magnevist®
Ligand: lonic linear chelate (DTPA)
Gadoversetamide (Optimark®)

Ligand: Non-ionic linear chelate (DTPA-BMEA)
Recommendations — ¢ European Medicines Agency (EMA) has
suspended intravenous use of all high-
risk agents (Omniscan®, Magnevist®) and
the Marketing Authorization Holder has
withdrawn Optimark® from the European
market.
e EMA states that Magnevist® may be used
for arthrography.
e CMSC supports these recommendations.
Intermediate risk of NSF
Contrast agents Gadobenate dimeglumine (Multihance®)
Ligand: lonic linear chelate (BOPTA)
Special feature: It is a combined extracellular
and liver specific agent with 2-3% albumin
binding. In man ~4% is excreted via the liver.
Gadoxetate disodium (Primovist®, Eovist®)
Ligand: lonic linear chelate (EOB-DTPA)
Recommendations  e¢ EMAstates that intermediate risk agents
(Multihance®, Primovist®) are approved for
hepato-biliary imaging only.
e CMSC supports this recommendation.

A. GENERAL ADVERSE REACTIONS 15


2

Lowest risk of NSF
Contrast agents Gadobutrol (Gadovist®, Gadavist®)

Ligand: Non-ionic cyclic chelate (BTDO3A)

Gadoterate meglumine (Dotarem®,
Magnescope® plus generic products)

Ligand: lonic cyclic chelate (DOTA)
Gadoteridol (Prohance®)

Ligand: Non-ionic cyclic chelate (HP-DO3A)
Recommendations — ® These agents should be used with CAUTION
in patients with GFR < 30 ml/min. There
should be at least 7 days between two
injections.

e Pregnant women: these agents can be used
to give essential diagnostic information.

e Lactating women: discarding the breast milk
in the 24 hours after contrast medium is not
considered necessary, but the patient can
discuss with the doctor whether she wishes
to do this.

e Laboratory testing of renal function (eGFR)
is not mandatory.

Recommendations _ Never deny a patient a clinically well-indicated
for all patients enhanced MR-examination.

In all patients use the smallest amount of
contrast medium necessary for a diagnostic
result.

Always record the name and dose of the
contrast agent used in the patient records.

16 A. GENERAL ADVERSE REACTIONS


B. RENAL ADVERSE REACTIONS
(POST-CONTRAST ACUTE KIDNEY INJURY, PC-AKI)

Definitions:

Post-contrast acute kidney injury (PC_AKI) is defined as an increase
in serum creatinine > 0.3 mg/dl (or > 26.5 mol/l), or > 1.5 times
baseline, within 48-72 hours of intravascular administration of a contrast
agent.

Intra-arterial injection with first pass renal exposure indicates that
contrast agent reaches the renal arteries in a relatively undiluted form,
é.g. injection into the left heart, thoracic and suprarenal abdominal aorta
or the renal arteries.

Intra-arterial injection with second pass renal exposure indicates
that contrast agent reaches the renal arteries after dilution either in the
pulmonary or peripheral circulation, e.g. injection into the right heart,
pulmonary artery, carotid, subclavian, coronary, mesenteric or infra-
renal arteries.

B.1. MEASUREMENT OF RENAL FUNCTION

e Estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR), calculated
from the serum creatinine, is the recommended method
to estimate renal function before contrast agent
administration.

In adults > 18 years the CKD-EPI formula is recommended
to calculate eGFR.

eGFR (ml/min/1.73 m?) =

Female sCr < 62 umol/l: 144 x (sCr / 62)°%?9 x 0.993*9"
Female sCr > 62 umol/l: 144 x (sCr / 62)'2 x 0.99349"
Male sCr <80 pmol/l: 141 x (sCr / 80)°4" x 0.99349"

Male sCr > 80 umol/l: 141 x (sCr / 80)12° x 0.99349"
(sCr in umol/l; age in years)
All equations x 1.159 if African American race.

In children, the revised Schwartz formula is
recommended to calculate eGFR

eGFR (ml/min/1.73 m?) = 36.5 x length / sCr
(sCr in umol/l; length in cm)

Note: Neither serum nor plasma creatinine is an ideal indicator
of renal function and may miss decreased renal function.

B. RENAL ADVERSE REACTIONS (POST-CONTRAST ACUTE KIDNEY INJURY, PC-AKI) 7


2

B.2. _ RENAL ADVERSE REACTIONS TO IODINE-BASED
CONTRAST MEDIA

RISK FACTORS FOR PC-AKI

Patient related eGFR less than 45 ml/min/1.73 m? before intra-
arterial contrast medium administration with
first pass renal exposure or in ICU patients.

eGFR less than 30 ml/min/1.73 m? before
intravenous contrast medium or intra-arterial
contrast medium administration with second
pass renal exposure.

Known or suspected acute renal failure.
Procedure related Intra-arterial contrast medium administration
with first pass renal exposure.

Large doses of contrast medium given intra-
arterially with first pass renal exposure.

High-osmolality contrast media.

Multiple contrast medium injections within
48-72 hours.

B.2.1. Time of Referral
ELECTIVE EXAMINATION

MEASUREMENT OF RENAL FUNCTION

e Measure eGFR before administering intravascular iodine-based
contrast medium
Either (a) In all patients
or (b) In patients who have a history of
- Renal disease (eGFR < 60 ml/min/1.73 m?)
- Kidney surgery
- Proteinuria
- Hypertension
- Hyperuricemia
- Diabetes mellitus

¢ Timing of eGFR measurement

- Within 7 days before contrast medium administration in patients with
an acute disease, an acute deterioration of a chronic disease or who
are hospital inpatients.

- Within 3 months before contrast medium administration in all other
patients.

18 B. RENAL ADVERSE REACTIONS (POST-CONTRAST ACUTE KIDNEY INJURY, PC-AKI)


EMERGENCY EXAMINATION

Identify at-risk patients (see above) if possible:

¢ Determine eGFR if the procedure can be deferred until the result is
available without harm to the patient.

e lf eGFR cannot be obtained, follow the protocols for patients with
eGFR less than 45 ml/min/1.73 m*? for intra-arterial administration with
first pass renal exposure and eGFR less than 30 ml/min/1.73 m? for
intravenous administration and intra-arterial administration with second
pass renal exposure as closely as clinical circumstances permit.

B.2.2. Before the Examination

ELECTIVE EXAMINATION

At-risk patients © Consider an alternative imaging method not
(see above) using iodine-based contrast media.
Intravenous saline and bicarbonate
protocols have similar efficacy for preventive
hydration.

For intravenous contrast medium and intra-
arterial contrast medium administration with
second pass renal exposure hydrate the
patient either (a) with intravenous sodium
bicarbonate 1.4 % (or 154 mmol/l in dextrose
5 % water): 3 ml/kg/h for 1 hour before
contrast medium or (b) with intravenous
saline 0.9 % 1 ml/kg/hr for 3-4 hours before
and 4-6 hours after contrast medium.

For intra-arterial contrast medium
administration with first pass renal
exposure hydrate the patient e/ther with (a)
intravenous sodium bicarbonate 1.4 % (or
154 mmol/l in dextrose 5 % water): 3 ml/
kg/h for 1 hour before followed by 1 ml/kg/
hr for 4-6 hours after contrast medium or (b)
with intravenous saline 0.9 % for 3-4 hours
before and 4-6 hours after contrast medium.
The clinician responsible for patient care
should individualize preventive hydration in
patients with severe congestive heart failure
(NYHA grade 3-4) or patients with end-stage
renal failure (@GFR < 15 ml/min/1.73 m?).
Oral hydration is not recommended as the
sole method of preventive hydration.

B. RENAL ADVERSE REACTIONS (POST-CONTRAST ACUTE KIDNEY INJURY, PC-AKI) 19 |


2

EMERGENCY EXAMINATION
At-risk patients © Consider an alternative imaging method not
(see above) using iodine-based contrast media.

e Use preventive hydration before contrast
medium administration (see ,Elective
examination’ for protocols).

B.2.3. Time of examination

All patients e Use low- or iso-osmolar contrast media.

e Use the lowest dose of contrast medium
consistent with a diagnostic result.
For intra-arterial contrast medium
administration with first pass renal
exposure, keep either the ratio CM dose (in
gram |) / absolute eGFR (in ml/min) < 1.1 or
the ratio CM volume (in ml) / eGFR (in ml/
min/1.73 m?)
< 3.0, when using contrast medium
concentration of 350 mgl/ml.

B.2.4. After the Examination

At-risk patients e Continue preventive hydration if appropriate

(see protocols above).

e Determine eGFR 48 hours after contrast
medium administration.

e lf at 48 hours there is a diagnosis of PC-AKI,
monitor the patient clinically for at least
30 days and determine eGFR at regular
intervals.

Note: No pharmacological prophylaxis (with statins, renal
vasodilators, receptor antagonists of endogenous vasoactive mediators
or cytoprotective drugs) has been shown to offer consistent protection
against PC-AKI.

200 B. RENAL ADVERSE REACTIONS (POST-CONTRAST ACUTE KIDNEY INJURY, PC-AKI)


=

e Multiple myeloma patients with normal renal function are
not at increased risk of PC-AKI provided that they are well
hydrated and that low- or iso-osmolar iodine-based contrast
media are used.

e Multiple myeloma patients often have reduced renal function,
and such patients are at increased risk of PC-AKI.

e Multiple myeloma patients often have hypercalcemia which
can increase the risk of kidney damage. Correction of
hypercalcemia before contrast medium administration should
be discussed with the hematologist.

e Assessment for Bence Jones proteinuria before contrast
medium administration is not necessary.

B.2.5. Multiple myeloma patients

B.3. RENAL ADVERSE REACTIONS TO GADOLINIUM-
BASED CONTRAST MEDIA

MR-EXAMINATIONS

e The risk of PC-AKI is very low when gadolinium-based
contrast agents are used in approved doses.

e In patients with reduced renal function refer to ESUR
guidelines on NSF, A.3.2.

RADIOGRAPHIC EXAMINATIONS

© Gadolinium-based contrast agents are not approved for
radiographic examinations.

¢ Gadolinium-based contrast agents should not be used for
radiographic examinations in patients with renal impairment
(eGFR < 60 ml/min/1.73 m%).

¢ Gadolinium-based contrast agents are more nephrotoxic than
iodine-based contrast media in equivalent X-ray attenuating
doses

B. RENAL ADVERSE REACTIONS (POST-CONTRAST ACUTE KIDNEY INJURY, PC-AKI) 21


B.4. PATIENTS WITH DIABETES MELLITUS TAKING
METFORMIN

B.4.1. lodine-based contrast media

1. Patients with eGFR > 30 ml/min/1.73 m? and no evidence of
AKI, receiving either intravenous contrast medium or intra-
arterial contrast medium with second pass renal exposure:
continue taking metformin normally.

2.Patients
(a) with eGFR < 30 ml/min/1.73 m? receiving
intravenous contrast medium, or intra-arterial contrast medium
with second pass renal exposure.

(b) Receiving intra-arterial contrast medium with first pass
renal exposure.

(c) With AKI: Stop taking metformin from the time of contrast
medium administration. Measure eGFR within 48 hours

and restart metformin if renal function has not changed
significantly.

B.4.2. Gadolinium-based contrast media

No special precautions are necessary when diabetic patients on
metformin are given gadolinium-based contrast agents as the
risk of PC-AKI is very low.

220 B. RENAL ADVERSE REACTIONS (POST-CONTRAST ACUTE KIDNEY INJURY, PC-AKI)


=

B.5. DIALYSIS AND CONTRAST MEDIUM
ADMINISTRATION

All iodine- and gadolinium-based contrast agents can be
removed by hemodialysis or peritoneal dialysis.

However, there is no evidence that hemodialysis protects
patients with impaired renal function from post contrast
acute kidney injury or nephrogenic systemic fibrosis.

In all patients, avoid osmotic and fluid overload.

To avoid the risk of NSF refer to A.3.2.

PATIENTS ON DIALYSIS

Patients on lodine-based contrast medium

hemodialysis e Correlation of time of the contrast medium
injection with the hemodialysis session is
unnecessary.

e Extra hemodialysis session to remove
contrast medium is unnecessary.

Gadolinium-based contrast agent

© Correlation of time of the contrast agent
injection with the hemodialysis session is
recommended.

e Extra hemodialysis session to remove
contrast agent as soon as possible after it
has been administered is recommended.

Patients on lodine-based contrast medium
continuous Hemodialysis to remove the contrast medium
ambulatory is unnecessary.

it I dialysis
peritonea Y Gadolinium-based contrast agent

The need for hemodialysis should be
discussed with the referring physician.

B. RENAL ADVERSE REACTIONS (POST-CONTRAST ACUTE KIDNEY INJURY, PC-AKI) 23


B.6. CAN IODINE- AND GADOLINIUM-BASED CONTRAST
AGENTS SAFELY BE GIVEN ON THE SAME DAY
FOR ROUTINE EXAMINATIONS?
Efficient practice may involve giving iodine- and gadolinium-based
contrast agents for enhanced CT and MR on the same day.
To reduce any potential for nephrotoxicity the following are
recommended:

=

. Patients with normal renal function or moderately reduced
(GFR > 30 ml/min/1.73 m2).
75 % of both gadolinium- and iodine-based contrast agents
are excreted by 4 hours after administration. There should be
4 hours between injections of iodine- and gadolinium-based
contrast agents.

2.Patients with severely reduced renal function
(GFR < 30 ml/min/1.73 m2 or on dialysis).
There should be 7 days between injections of iodine- and
gadolinium-based contrast agents.

Note: Gadolinium-based contrast agents attenuate X-rays
well and may be misinterpreted on CT when they have been
excreted into the urinary tract. For abdominal examinations,
enhanced CT should be done before enhanced MR. For chest
and brain examinations, either CT or MR may be done first.

24 B. RENAL ADVERSE REACTIONS (POST-CONTRAST ACUTE KIDNEY INJURY, PC-AKI)


=

B.7. HOW LONG SHOULD THERE BE BETWEEN
TWO IODINE-BASED CONTRAST MEDIUM
INJECTIONS FOR ROUTINE EXAMINATIONS?

. Patients with normal or moderately reduced renal

function (GFR > 30 ml/min/1.73 m2).

75 % of iodine-based contrast medium is excreted

by 4 hours after administration. There should be 4 hours
between injections of iodine-based contrast medium.

=

2.Patients with severely reduced renal function
(GFR < 30 ml/min/1.73 m2).
There should be 48 hours between injections of iodine-based
contrast medium.

3.Patients on dialysis.
If there is remnant renal function there should be at least
48 hours between injections of iodine-based contrast medium.

B.8. _HOW LONG SHOULD THERE BE BETWEEN
TWO GADOLINIUM-BASED CONTRAST AGENT
INJECTIONS FOR ROUTINE EXAMINATIONS?

. Patients with normal or moderately reduced renal function
(GFR > 30 ml/min/1.73 m2).
75 % of extracellular gadolinium-based contrast agents
are excreted by 4 hours after administration.
There should be 4 hours between injections of gadolinium-
based contrast agent.
2.Patients with severely reduced renal function
(GFR < 30 ml/min/1.73 m2) or on dialysis.
There should be 7 days between injections of gadolinium-
based contrast agent

=

B. RENAL ADVERSE REACTIONS (POST-CONTRAST ACUTE KIDNEY INJURY, PC-AKI) 25


2

C. MISCELLANEOUS

C.1. CONTRAST MEDIUM EXTRAVASATION

Type of injuries

RISK FACTORS
Technique-related

Patient-related

To reduce the risk

Management

26 C. MISCELLANEOUS

Most injuries are minor.

Severe injuries include skin ulceration,
soft-tissue necrosis, and compartment
syndrome.

Use of a power injector.
Less optimal injection sites including lower
limb and small distal veins.
Large volume of contrast medium.
High-osmolar contrast media.
High-viscosity contrast media.
Inability to communicate.
Fragile or damaged veins.
Arterial insufficiency.
Compromised lymphatic and/or venous
drainage.
Obesity.
Intravenous technique should always be
meticulous using an appropriate sized plastic
cannula placed in a suitable vein to handle
the flow rate used during the injection.
Consider use of cannulas with sideholes.
Test injection with normal saline.
Use non-ionic iodine-based contrast
medium.
Documenting the extravasation with a plain
radiograph, CT scan or MR scan of the
affected region may be helpful.
Conservative management is adequate
in most cases.

e Limb elevation

e Ice packs

e Careful monitoring.
If a serious injury is suspected, seek the
advice of a surgeon.


=

C.2. PULMONARY EFFECTS OF IODINE-BASED
CONTRAST MEDIA

Pulmonary adverse — e Bronchospasm.

effects Increased pulmonary vascular resistance.
Pulmonary edema.

History of asthma.

History of pulmonary hypertension.
Incipient cardiac failure.

To reduce the risk of Use low- or iso-osmolar contrast media.
pulmonary adverse = ® Avoid large doses of contrast media.
effects

Patients at high risk

C.3. EFFECTS OF CONTRAST MEDIA ON BLOOD
AND ENDOTHELIUM

C.3.1. Thrombosis

C.3.1.1. lodine-based contrast media

The clinically important adverse effect of iodine-based contrast

media on blood and endothelium is thrombosis.

It is recognized that:

e All contrast media have anticoagulant properties, especially
ionic agents.

e High-osmolar ionic contrast media may induce thrombosis
due to endothelial damage, particularly in phlebographic
procedures.

e Drugs and interventional devices that decrease the risk
of thromboembolic complications during interventional
procedures minimize the importance of the effects of
contrast media.

Guidelines

e Meticulous angiographic technique is mandatory and is
the most important factor in reducing thromboembolic
complications.

e Low- or iso-osmolar contrast media should be used for
diagnostic and interventional angiographic procedures
including phlebography.

C. MISCELLANEOUS 27


2

C.3.2. Sickle Cell Disease

C.3.2.1. lodine-based contrast media

e In patients with sickle cell disease, high-osmolar iodine-
based contrast media may cause red cell sickling, leading to
hemolysis and small vessel occlusion.

e Low- or iso-osmolar iodine-based contrast media produce no
more adverse events in patients with sickle cell disease than
in the normal population.

Guidelines

e Use low- or iso-osmolar iodine-based contrast media.
e Hydrate patients before contrast medium administration.

C.3.2.2.Gadolinium-based contrast media

e The smaller doses of gadolinium-based contrast agents
compared to iodine-based contrast media reduce the
osmolar load, so contrast agent osmolality is unlikely to be a
significant problem.

e No adverse events suggestive of red blood cell sickling have
been reported after gadolinium-based contrast agents.

Guidelines

e Use any gadolinium-based contrast agent.
e No special preparation is necessary.

C.4. CONTRAST AGENTS AND CATECHOLAMINE
PRODUCING TUMORS (PHEOCHROMOCYTOMA
AND PARAGANGLIOMA)

Preparation

a) Before intravenous iodine- or gadolinium-based contrast agent:
no special preparation is required.

b) Before intra-arterial iodine-based contrast medium:

a. and B-adrenergic blockade with orally administered drugs under
the supervision of the referring physician is recommended.

Type of contrast agent which should be used

e lodine-based: non-ionic agent.
© Gadolinium-based: any agent.

28 C. MISCELLANEOUS


C.5.

Pregnancy

Lactation

Pregnant or lactating
mother with renal
impairment

PREGNANCY AND LACTATION

lodine-based
contrast media

a)ln exceptional
circumstances,
when radiographic
examination is
essential, iodine-
based contrast media
may be given to the
pregnant female.

b) Following
administration of
iodine-based contrast
media to the mother
during pregnancy,
thyroid function
should be checked in
the neonate during
the first week.

Breast feeding may
be continued normally
when iodine-based
contrast media is
given to the mother.

See renal adverse
reactions (B.2.). No
additional precautions
are necessary for the
fetus or neonate.

=

Gadolinium-based
contrast agents

a) When there is a
very strong indication
for enhanced MR,
the smallest possible
dose of a macrocyclic
gadolinium contrast
agent (see A.3.2.
Agents with lowest
risk of NSF) may be
given to the pregnant
female.

b) Following
administration of
gadolinium-based
agents to the mother
during pregnancy, no
neonatal tests are
necessary.

Breast feeding may
be continued normally
when macrocyclic
gadolinium-based
contrast agents are
given to the mother.
Do not administer
gadolinium-based
contrast agents.

C. MISCELLANEOUS 29


2

C.6. INTERACTION WITH OTHER DRUGS AND
CLINICAL TESTS

General Be aware of the patient's drug history.
recommendation Keep a proper record of the contrast agent
injection (time, dose, name).
Do not mix contrast agents with other drugs in
tubes and syringes.

Drugs needing special attention

Metformin Refer to renal adverse reactions section (B.4.).
Nephrotoxic drugs Stopping nephrotoxic drugs before administering
Cyclosporine contrast agents is not generally recommended.
Cisplatin

Aminoglycosides
Non steroid anti-
inflammatory drugs

&-blocker &-blockers may impair the management of
bronchospasm and the response to adrenaline.
Interleukin-2 Refer to late adverse reactions section (A.2.).

Non-emergency biochemical assays

Recommendation e Preferably collect urine and blood before

administration of a contrast agent.

In patients with normal renal function, blood

can be collected 4 hours after contrast agent

administration if necessary.

In patients with reduced renal function (eGFR

< 45 ml/min/1.73 m?), blood collection should

be delayed for as long as possible after

contrast agent administration.

Urine collection should not be done within 24

hours of administration of a contrast agent.

The effects of the contrast agents on the

analyses may differ dependent on which

analytic method is used.

Isotope studies and/or treatment

Thyroid Patients undergoing therapy with radioactive iodine
should not have received iodine-based contrast
medium for at least 2 months before treatment.

Isotope imaging of the thyroid should be avoided
for 2 months after iodine-based contrast medium

injection.
Bone, red blood Avoid iodine-based contrast medium injection for
cell labelling at least 24 hours before the isotope study.

300 C. MISCELLANEOUS


=

C.7. GADOLINIUM ISSUES
C.7.1.. Gadolinium retention in the brain

C.7.1.1. Detection

e Seen as regions of increased signal intensity in the deep brain
nuclei on unenhanced T1-weighed MR-images.

e The association between these appearances and gadolinium-

based contrast agents was first noted in 2014.

C.7.1.2. Characteristics

e The signal intensity changes are not specific and may occur
after manganese, iron, calcium etc.

e MR is less sensitive for detecting gadolinium in the brain than
tissue analysis after biopsy.

e It is not known whether the deposited gadolinium is chelated.

¢ No neurological symptoms have yet been reported.

e The clinical significance of these changes is not yet known.

e All studies have been retrospective.

© Occurs independent of renal function.

C.7.1.3. Relation to gadolinium-based agents

e High signal intensity in the deep brain nuclei on MRI has been
reported after all linear gadolinium-based agents, but not after
macrocyclic agents.

e Analysis of brain tissue has detected gadolinium after
all gadolinium-based agents with the highest levels of
gadolinium in patients who had linear chelates and the lowest
levels in those who had macrocyclic agents.

e The greater the previous cumulative dose of the gadolinium-
based agent, the more widespread are the areas of increased
signal intensity.

e Only occurs after multiple doses.

C. MISCELLANEOUS 31


C.7.2. Gadolinium retention in bone, liver and skin

C.7.2.1. Detection
e Requires biopsy and tissue analysis.

C.7.2.2. Characteristics

© Occurs independent of renal function.

e May occur after any agent but greater amounts are retained
after non-ionic linear agents.

e Cannot be detected by MRI.

e The amounts deposited are small but greater than in the brain.

e Bone and liver retention do not produce clinical symptoms.

e Skin deposition causes red skin plaques similar to those seen
in NSF

e Apart from NSF, the clinical consequences of bone, liver and
skin deposition are unknown.

C.7.3. Gadolinium contamination of the environment

e Use of gadolinium-based contrast agents for MRI has led to
gadolinium reaching the environment in waste water.

e At present the amounts of gadolinium in surface and tap
water are very low but they are likely to increase with
increasing use of gadolinium-based contrast agents.

e The risks of this gadolinium in the environment are not
yet known but there is concern that it might contribute to
gadolinium deposition in human tissues.

e Monitoring of gadolinium level in the water and better water
purification using reverse osmosis membranes are needed
to reduce the potential for harm (see Acta Radiol 2017, 58:
259-263).

320 C. MISCELLANEOUS


=

C.8. SAFETY OF ULTRASOUND CONTRAST AGENTS

Statements e Ultrasound contrast agents are generally safe.
® Clinical evidence of ultrasound contrast
agent related events in critically ill patients
and patients with acute coronary disease is

limited.

Contraindication e Avoid ultrasound contrast agents in the 24
hours before extracorporeal shock wave
treatment.

Type and severity of |=° The majority of reactions are minor (e.g.

reactions headache, nausea, sensation of heat, altered

taste) and self-resolving.

e More severe acute reactions are rare
and are similar to those after iodine- and
gadolinium-based agents (see A.1.).

To reduce the risk © Check for intolerance to any of the
components of the contrast agent.

e Use the lowest level of acoustic output and
shortest scanning time to allow a diagnostic
examination.

Treatment e If a serious event occurs — see General
adverse reaction section A.1.2.

C. MISCELLANEOUS 33


2

C.9.

Statements
Contraindications

Cautions

Complications

340 C. MISCELLANEOUS

SAFETY OF BARIUM CONTRAST MEDIA

Recommended action

Integrity of gut wall

compromised

Previous allergic

reactions to barium

products

Bowel strictures
Extensive colitis
Reduced bowel
motility

Venous intravasation

Aspiration

Use iodine-based water
soluble contrast media.

In neonates and patients
at risk of leakage into
mediastinum and/or lungs
use low- or iso-osmolar
contrast media.

Use iodine-based water
soluble contrast media
and be prepared to treat a
reaction.

Use only small amounts.
Avoid barium enemas.
Encourage fluid intake.

e Early identification and
careful observation.

e Antibiotics and
intravenous fluids.

e Emergency treatment
may be needed.

e Bronchoscopic removal
for large amounts.

e Chest physiotherapy.

e Antibiotics.



C.10. PEDIATRIC USE OF CONTRAST AGENTS

e Safety considerations when using contrast media in
neonates, infants and children are similar to, but not the same

as, in adults.

e Contrast agent dose must be adjusted for patient age and
weight.

e Age-specific normal values of serum creatinine etc. must be
used.

e The revised Schwartz equation is recommended to measure
eGFR (see B.1.).

e For iodine-based contrast media, non-ionic agents should be
used.

e For gadolinium-based contrast agents, high-risk agents should
be avoided.

The Summary of Product Characteristics for the contrast
agent should be consulted, because not all contrast agents
are approved for use in children.

If no suitable contrast agent approved for use in children is
available, informed consent for off-label use must be obtained
from the parents. However, if use of a specific contrast agent
in children is absolutely contra-indicated, it may not be used,
even with informed consent.

C.11. OFF-LABEL USE OF CONTRAST AGENTS

e Off-label use of diagnostic and therapeutic medication is
common.

e The Summary of Product Characteristics (SPC) or label should
be checked to see if the proposed contrast agent use is
approved for the particular patient and indication.

e Choose a contrast agent which is approved for the particular
patient and indication whenever possible.

e If there is no suitable approved contrast medium, the
prescriber must tell the patient about the risks and benefits
of off-label contrast agent use, and must obtain the patient’s
informed consent to off-label contrast agent administration.

C. MISCELLANEOUS 35


2

D. QUESTIONNAIRES/LETTERS

D.1. AN EXAMPLE OF A SUITABLE LETTER FORTHE
PATIENT TO TAKE TO THE ALLGERGY CONSULTATION

Dear colleague,

(Insert patient's name and details) had a hypersensitivity reaction after
the administration of a contrast agent on (insert date).

Examination type (e.g. CT, MAI, IV.....):

Type of contrast agent:
O  iodine-based
O — gadolinium-based
O ultrasound

Name of the contrast agent:

Dose administered: ml

Route of administration (e.g. IV, IA, intra-articular, oral, local......):
Time between the injection and the start of the clinical symptoms:

Type of symptoms (describe):

36 D. QUESTIONNAIRES/LETTERS


=

Grade of the reaction according to the Ring and Messmer classification:

Grade 1 Grade 2 Grade 3 Grade 4
Grade Dermal Abdominal Respiratory Cardiovascular
1 Pruritus
Flushing
Urticaria
Angioedema
2 Pruritus Nausea Rhinorrhea Tachycardia
Flushing Cramping Hoarseness (> 20 bpm)
Urticaria Dyspnea Blood pressure
Angioedema change (> 20
mm Hg systolic)
Arrhythmia
3 Pruritus Vomiting Laryngeal Shock
Flushing Defecation edema
Urticaria Diarrhea Bronchospasm
Angioedema Cyanosis
4 Pruritus Vomiting Respiratory Carciac arrest
Flushing Defecation arrest
Urticaria Diarrhea
Angioedema
Treatment given during the reaction:

e (please specify)

Outcome (e.g. follow up, ICU, return home ...... ):
e Histamine and/or Tryptase blood tests:

Blood test performed at the time of the reaction
YES/NO 2 HRS LATER YES/NO

Results: Histamine:
Tryptase:

PREVIOUS HISTORY OF CONTRAST AGENT REACTION
e Yes/No
e If yes, please specify type of contrast agent and symptoms

Thank you for seeing the patient and performing skin testing to
categorize the reaction as either allergic or non-allergic hypersensitivity,
and to look for cross-reactivity so that a safer contrast agent can be
recommended for future injections.

Your sincerely,
Dr (Name and details)

D. QUESTIONNAIRES/LETTERS 37


2

D.2.

oo NO OT PF WN

= —_ £x-_
a)

13.

Completed by Date

QUESTIONNAIRE FOR IODINE-BASED CONTRAST

MEDIA ADMINISTRATION TO BE COMPLETED BY

THE REFERRING CLINICIAN

Yes

No

History of moderate or severe reaction
to an iodine-based contrast medium

History of atopy requiring treatment

History of unstable asthma

Hyperthyroidism

Heart failure

Diabetes mellitus

History of renal disease

Previous renal surgery

History of proteinuria

Hypertension

Gout

. Most recent measurement of serum creatinine

Is the patient currently taking any of the following drugs

e¢ Metformin

e Interleukin 2

e NSAIDs

e Aminoglycosides

e (&-blockers

38 D. QUESTIONNAIRES/LETTERS


=

D.3. QUESTIONNAIRE FOR GADOLINIUM-BASED
CONTRAST AGENT ADMINISTRATION TO BE
COMPLETED BY THE REFERRING CLINICIAN

Yes No
1. History of moderate or severe reaction
to a gadolinium-based contrast medium

2. History of atopy requiring treatment

3. History of unstable asthma

4. Has the patient end-stage renal failure

(eGFR < 30 mli/min/1.73m2) or is the patient on dialysis
5. Has the patient reduced renal function*

(eGFR between 30 and 60 ml/min/1.73 m2)

* Only if high-risk agents are used

Completed by Date

D. QUESTIONNAIRES/LETTERS 39


2

E. APPENDIX

Appendix 1. Publications from the ESUR Contrast
Media Safety Committee

Aspelin P Stacul F Thomsen HS, Morcos SK, Molen AJvd, Members of
Contrast Media Safety Committee of European Society of Urogenital
Radiology (ESUR). lodinated Contrast Media and Blood interactions.
Eur Radiol 2006; 16: 1041-1049.

Bellin M-F Jakobsen JA, Tomassin |, Thomsen HS, Morcos SK, Members
of the Contrast Media Safety Committee of the European Society
of Urogenital Radiology. Contrast medium extravasation injury:
guidelines for prevention and management. Eur Radiol 2002; 12:
2807-2812.

Bellin M-F Webb JAW, Molen AJvd, Thomsen HS, Morcos SK, Members
of Contrast Media Safety Committee of European Society of
Urogenital Radiology (ESUR). Safety of MR liver specific contrast
media. Eur Radio! 2005; 15: 1607-1614.

Bellin M-F, Stacul F Webb JAW, Thomsen HS, Morcos S, AlménT, Aspelin
P Clement O, Heinz-Peer G, Reimer P van der Molen A on behalf of
the Contrast Media Safety Committee of the European Society of
Uroradiology (ESUR). Late adverse reactions to intravascular iodine-
based contrast media: an update. Eur Radiol 2011; 21: 2305-2310.

ESUR Contrast Media Safety Committee (Thomsen HS). ESUR guideline:
gadolinium-based contrast media and nephrogenic systemic fibrosis.
Eur Radiol 2007; 17: 2692-2696.

Jakobsen JA, Oyen R, Thomsen HS, Morcos SK, Members of Contrast
Media Safety Committee of European Society of Urogenital
Radiology (ESUR). Safety of ultrasound contrast agents. Eur Radiol
2005; 15: 941-945.

Molen AJvd, Thomsen HS, Morcos SK, Members of Contrast Media
Safety Committee of European Society of Urogenital Radiology
(ESUR). Effect of iodinated contrast media on thyroid function in
adults. Eur Radiol 2004; 14: 902-906.

Molen AJvd, Reimer P Dekkers IA, Bongartz G, Bellin M-F Bertolotto
M, Clement O, Heinz-Peer G, Stacul F Webb JAW, Thomsen HS on
behalf of the ESUR Contrast Media Safety Committee. Post-contrast
acute kidney injury part 1: Definition, incidence, role of contrast
medium and risk factors. Eur Radiol 2018; 28:2845-2855.

400 E. APPENDIX


=

Molen AJvd, Reimer P Dekkers IA, Bongartz G, Bellin M-F Bertolotto
M, Clement O, Heinz-Peer G, Stacul F Webb JAVV, Thomsen HS on
behalf of the ESUR Contrast Media Safety Committee. Post-contrast
acute kidney injury part 2: Risk stratification, role of hydration and
other prophylactiv measures, patients taking metformin and chronic
dialysis patientS. Eur Radiol 2018; 28: 2856-2869.

Morcos SK, Bellin M-F Thomsen HS, Almén T, Aspelin P Heinz-Peer G,
Jakobsen JA, Liss P Oyen R, Stacul F Van der Molen AJ, Webb
JAW. Reducing the risk of iodine-based and MRI contrast media
administration: Recommendation for a questionnaire at the time of
booking. Eur J Radiol 2008; 66: 225-229.

Morcos SK, Thomsen HS, Exley CM, Members of Contrast Media Safety
Committee of European Society of Urogenital Radiology (ESUR).
Contrast media: interaction with other drugs and clinical tests. Eur
Radiol 2005; 15: 1463-1468.

Morcos SK, Thomsen HS, Webb JAW and members of Contrast Media
Safety Committee of the European Society of Urogenital Radiology
(ESUR).Contrast media induced nephrotoxicity: a consensus report.
Eur Radiol 1999; 9: 1602-1613.

Morcos SK, Thomsen HS, Webb JAW and members of Contrast Media
Safety Committee of the European Society of Urogenital Radiology
(ESUR). Prevention of generalized reactions to contrast media: a
consensus report and guidelines. Eur Radiol 2001; 11: 1720-1728.

Morcos SK, Thomsen HS, Webb JAVV, Members of the Contrast Media
Safety Committee of European Society of Urogenital Radiology.
Dialysis and contrast media. Eur Radiol 2002; 12: 3026-3030.

Stacul F, van der Molen AJ, Reimer P Webb JAW, Thomsen HS, Morcos
SK, AlménT, Aspelin P Bellin M-F Clement O, Heinz-Peer G on behalf
of the Contrast Media Safety Committee of the European Society of
Urogenital Radiology. Contrast induced nephropathy: updated ESUR
Contrast Media Safety Committee guidelines. Eur Radiol 2011; 21:
2527-2541.

Stacul F Bertolotto M, Thomsen HS, Pozzato G, Ugolini D, Bellin M-F,
Bongartz G, Clement O, Heinz-Peer G, van der Molen A, Reimer P
Webb JAW on behalf of the ESUR Contrast Media Safety Committee.
lodine-Based Contrast Media and Multiple Myeloma: Literature
Review and ESUR Contrast Media Safety Committee Guidelines. Eur
Radiol 2018; 28: 683-691.

Thomsen HS (ed.) Contrast Media. Safety issues and ESUR Guidelines
1st ed. Heidelberg, Springer 2006.

E. APPENDIX a


2

Thomsen HS, Webb JAW (eds.) Contrast Media. Safety Issues and ESUR
Guidelines 2" ed. Heidelberg, Springer 2009.

Thomsen HS, Webb JAW (eds.) Contrast Media. Safety Issues and ESUR
Guidelines 3 ed. Heidelberg, Springer 2014.

Thomsen HS, Almén T, Morcos SK, Members of Contrast Media Safety
Committee of European Society of Urogenital Radiology. Gadolinium-
containing contrast media for radiographic examinations: a position
paper. Eur Radiol 2002; 12: 2600-2605.

Thomsen HS, Morcos SK and members of Contrast Media Safety
Committee of the European Society of Urogenital Radiology (ESUR).
Contrast media and metformin. Guidelines to diminish the risk of
lactic acidosis in non-insulin dependent diabetics after administration
of contrast media. Eur Radiol 1999; 9: 738-740.

Thomsen HS, Morcos SK, Members of Contrast Media Safety Committee
of European Society of Urogenital Radiology (ESUR). Management
of acute adverse reactions to contrast media. Eur Radiol 2004; 14:
476-481.

Thomsen HS, Morcos SK, Members of Contrast Media Safety
Committee of European Society of Urogenital Radiology (ESUR). In
which patients should serum-creatinine be measured before contrast
medium administration? Eur Radiol 2005; 15: 749-754.

Thomsen HS, Morcos SK, AlménT, Bellin M-F Bertolotto M, Bongartz G,
Clement O, Leander P Heinz-Peer G, Reimer P Stacul F Webb JAW,
van der Molen A on behalf of the Contrast Media Safety Committee
of European Society of Urogenital Radiology (ESUR). Nephrogenic
Systemic Fibrosis and Gadolinium-based Contrast Media: Updated
ESUR Contrast Medium Safety Committee Guidelines. Eur Radiol
2013; 23: 307-318.

Webb JAW, Stacul F Thomsen HS, Morcos SK, Members of the Contrast
Media Safety Committee of the European Society of Urogenital
Radiology (ESUR). Late adverse reactions to intravascular iodinated
contrast media. Eur Radiol 2003; 13: 181-184.

Webb JAW, Thomsen HS, Morcos SK, Members of Contrast Media
Safety Committee of European Society of Urogenital Radiology
(ESUR). The use of iodinated and gadolinium contrast media during
pregnancy and lactation. Eur Radiol 2005; 15: 1234-1240.

420 E. APPENDIX


=

Appendix 2. Contrast Media Safety Committee - Spring 2018

Henrik S. Thomsen (DK) Chairman
Fulvio Stacul (IT) Secretary
Marie-France Bellin (FR)
Michele Bertolotto (IT)
Georg Bongartz (CH)
Torkel Brismar (SE)

Olivier Clement (FR)
Jean-Michel Correas (FR)
Remy W. F. Geenen (NL)
Gertraud Heinz-Peer (AT)
Andreas H. Mahnken (DE)
Alexander Radbruch (DE)
Peter Reimer (DE)

Giles Roditi (UK)

Laura Romanini (IT)

Aart J. van der Molen (NL)
Judith A.W. Webb (UK)

Corresponding member
Claudio Ronco (IT)

Consultants

Thomas Balzer (Bayer, DE)
Eric Lancelot (Guerbet, FR)
Alberto Spinazzi (Bracco, IT)

E. APPENDIX 43


NOTES



4

www.esur.org



