1. What are the ESUR guidelines for preventing contrast-induced nephropathy (CIN) in patients undergoing CT scans?
2. According to the ESUR, how should patients with known contrast allergies be pre-treated before iodinated contrast administration?
3. What are the ESUR guidelines for the use of gadolinium-based contrast agents in patients with stage 3 chronic kidney disease?
4. How does the ESUR recommend handling patients taking metformin who require iodinated contrast for imaging?
5. What are the ESUR recommendations for using contrast media in patients with diabetes mellitus?
6. How should contrast media be used according to the ESUR in patients with severe renal impairment?
7. What does the ESUR suggest for imaging pregnant women who require contrast media?
8. What hydration protocols are recommended by the ESUR for patients at risk of contrast-induced nephropathy?
9. How does the ESUR advise using iodinated contrast media in patients with hyperthyroidism?
10. According to the ESUR, what precautions should be taken when using gadolinium-based contrast agents in pediatric patients?
11. What are the ESUR guidelines for the use of contrast-enhanced ultrasound (CEUS) in liver imaging?
12. How does the ESUR recommend monitoring for nephrogenic systemic fibrosis (NSF) in patients receiving gadolinium-based contrast?
13. What are the ESUR recommendations for the use of contrast media in elderly patients?
14. According to the ESUR, what is the recommended protocol for patients with renal insufficiency who need gadolinium-based contrast?
15. How does the ESUR suggest managing patients with a history of contrast-induced acute kidney injury (CI-AKI)?
16. What are the ESUR guidelines for the safe use of iodinated contrast media in patients with sickle cell disease?
17. How does the ESUR recommend preventing allergic reactions to iodinated contrast media in at-risk patients?
18. What are the ESUR recommendations for patients with cardiac pacemakers who need MRI with gadolinium contrast?
19. According to the ESUR, how should patients with myeloma be managed when receiving iodinated contrast?
20. What does the ESUR suggest for the use of MRI in patients with claustrophobia?
21. How does the ESUR recommend using gadolinium-based contrast agents in patients with a history of liver disease?
22. What are the ESUR guidelines for premedicating patients with a history of severe allergies to contrast media?
23. According to the ESUR, what are the risk factors for developing nephrogenic systemic fibrosis (NSF)?
24. How does the ESUR recommend monitoring renal function in patients receiving iodinated contrast for repeated imaging?
25. What are the ESUR guidelines for using iodinated contrast media in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)?
26. How does the ESUR recommend managing iodine contrast in patients with thyroid nodules?
27. What does the ESUR advise for contrast administration in patients with known adrenal gland dysfunction?
28. According to the ESUR, what hydration protocols should be used in patients at high risk for contrast-induced nephropathy?
29. How does the ESUR recommend imaging patients with cystic fibrosis using contrast media?
30. What are the ESUR guidelines for the safe use of gadolinium-based contrast in patients undergoing chemotherapy?
31. How should contrast-enhanced CT scans be managed in patients with borderline kidney function according to ESUR?
32. What are the ESUR guidelines for using contrast media in patients with a history of asthma?
33. How does the ESUR suggest using contrast in patients with liver transplant and suspected rejection?
34. What are the ESUR recommendations for managing patients who are fasting before iodinated contrast administration?
35. How does the ESUR recommend handling patients with renal impairment undergoing MRI with contrast?
36. What does the ESUR advise regarding the use of gadolinium-based contrast in patients with a history of seizures?
37. According to the ESUR, how should contrast be managed in patients with pulmonary hypertension?
38. How does the ESUR recommend using contrast media in patients with lymphoma?
39. What precautions does the ESUR recommend for using contrast media in patients with multiple sclerosis?
40. According to the ESUR, how should patients with hypothyroidism be managed when receiving iodinated contrast?
41. What are the ESUR guidelines for the use of gadolinium-based contrast agents in patients with liver cirrhosis?
42. How does the ESUR recommend monitoring patients after the administration of gadolinium-based contrast media?
43. According to the ESUR, what are the recommended dosages for iodinated contrast in pediatric imaging?
44. How should patients with chronic kidney disease be prepared for contrast-enhanced CT imaging according to ESUR?
45. What does the ESUR recommend for using MRI with gadolinium in patients with heart disease?
46. According to the ESUR, how should iodinated contrast media be handled in patients with a history of anaphylaxis?
47. What are the ESUR guidelines for imaging pregnant patients using gadolinium-based contrast?
48. How does the ESUR suggest using iodinated contrast in patients with suspected acute pancreatitis?
49. What are the ESUR recommendations for using contrast media in patients with active infections?
50. According to the ESUR, what is the protocol for using contrast-enhanced ultrasound in pediatric patients?